.. _upgrade-to-3.11.2:

######################
 release notes 3.11.2
######################

This release focuses on Django 4.2 support which will be LTS. django CMS version 3.11.x will be supported until the end of life of Django 4.2 estimated for April 2026.

********************
What's new in 3.11.2
********************

Features:
---------
* add django 4.2 support (#7481) (5478faa5c) -- Vinit Kumar
* add setting to redirect slugs to lowercase (#7509) (01aedee9f) -- pajowu
* add setting so redirect preserves params (#7489) (dcb9c4b3a) -- Ivo Branco
* add download statistics to readme (#7474) (25b2303f7) -- Fabian Braun

Bug Fixes:
----------
* replace ' by ′ in fr translation − no more "page d\u0027accueil"! (#7488) (b4acc9a6b) -- Corentin Bettiol
* Link both user and group from global page permissions to change form (#7486) (6cb47629b) -- Fabian Braun
* Build docs always from the current local version (#7472) (#7475) (7aaddd45a) -- Fabian Braun

Statistics:
-----------

This release includes 21 pull requests, and was created with the help of the following contributors (in alphabetical order):

* Corentin Bettiol (1 pull request)
* Danny Waser (1 pull request)
* Fabian Braun (10 pull requests)
* Ivo Branco (1 pull request)
* Jasper (1 pull request)
* Nihal Rahman (1 pull request)
* Vinit Kumar (3 pull requests)
* pajowu (1 pull request)

With the review help of the following contributors:

* Fabian Braun
* Nihal
* Vinit Kumar

Thanks to all contributors for their efforts!


************************
How to upgrade to
************************

We assume you are upgrading from django CMS 3.11.1.

Please make sure that your current database is consistent and in a healthy
state, and **make a copy of the database before proceeding further.**

Check your settings of `CMS_LANGUAGES` (if used), as it was ignored by default in preceding versions.
For more information, please see: https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/6795

Then run::

    python manage.py migrate  # to ensure that your database is up-to-date with migrations
    python manage.py cms fix-tree

Check custom code and third-party applications for use of deprecated or removed functionality or
APIs (see above). Some third-party components may need to be updated.

Install the new version of django CMS from GitHub or via pip.

Run::

    python manage.py migrate

to apply the new migrations.
