.. _upgrade-to-3.11.9:

####################
Release notes 3.11.9
####################

************
Security fix
************

django CMS 3.11.9 closes a security vulnerability that could allow an attacker
to inject malicious code into the page title allowing to load arbitrary
javascript code when viewing the page. We recommend that you upgrade to
this version as soon as possible.

The security issue is of low severity, since an attacker needs to have access
to the django CMS admin interface to exploit it.

Thanks to `Ali İltizar (@alii76tt) <https://twitter.com/alii76tt>`_ for
reporting the issue.

.. note::

   As ever, we remind our users and contributors that all security reports,
   patches and concerns be addressed only to our security team by email, at
   `security@django-cms.org <mailto:security@django-cms.org>`_.



********************
What's new in 3.11.9
********************

Bug Fixes:
----------
* XSS vulnerability for page title (#8075) (699f04e9b) -- Fabian Braun
* fix: Accept legacy action names for page permission check (#8022) (fc4838f99) -- Fabian Braun


Statistics:
-----------

This release includes 4 pull requests, and was created with the help of the following contributors (in alphabetical order):

* Fabian Braun (2 pull requests)

With the review help of the following contributors:

* Mark Walker

Thanks to all contributors for their efforts!

************************
How to upgrade to 3.11.9
************************

We assume you are upgrading from django CMS 3.11.8.

Please make sure that your current database is consistent and in a healthy
state, and **make a copy of the database before proceeding further.**

Then run::

    python manage.py migrate  # to ensure that your database is up-to-date with migrations
    python manage.py cms fix-tree

Check custom code and third-party applications for use of deprecated or removed functionality or
APIs (see above). Some third-party components may need to be updated.

Install the new version of django CMS from GitHub or via pip.

Run::

    python manage.py migrate

to apply the new migrations.
