.. _upgrade-to-3.11.4:

<<<<<<< HEAD
######################
 release notes 3.11.3
######################

This release focuses on Django 4.2 support which will be LTS. django CMS version 3.11.x will be supported until the end of life of Django 4.2 estimated for April 2026.

Compared to 3.11.2 it fixes a bug which broke the dropdown menu in the page tree.
=======
#####################
 release notes 3.11.4
#####################

********************
What's new in 3.11.4
********************

Bug Fixes:
----------
* Remove superfluous curly bracket left behind on PR 7488 (#7529) -- Corentin Bettiol
* Fix admin tests (#6848) for some post requests (#7535) -- Fabian Braun

Statistics:
-----------

This release includes 2 pull requests, and was created with the help of the following contributors (in alphabetical order):

* Corentin Bettiol (1 pull request)
* Fabian Braun (1 pull requests)

With the review help of the following contributors:

* Fabian Braun
* Vinit Kumar
=======
Features:
 ---------
 * Update dark mode switch to be compatible with Django 4.2 admin dark mode (#7549) (1106ae6d7) -- Fabian Braun

 Bug Fixes:
 ----------
 * Toolbar action button becomes hard to read in dark mode (c626022ba) -- Fabian Braun
 * Backport v4.1.0rc4 fixes - Admin language and styling (#7630) (#7641) (90b72ebea) -- Fabian Braun
 * diff-dom freezing on content refresh: #7460 (#7600) (d8e9c527e) -- Vinit Kumar
 * Fixed RecursionError when extending templates (#7594) (c99f78759) -- mihalikv
 * JS issues with running CMS under cypress (#7591) (ce4c29948) -- Vinit Kumar
 * Mitigate performance hit due to deprecation warnings for v4.1 (#7587) (9908d7e70) -- Fabian Braun
 * create page wizard fails with Asian page titles/unicode slugs (#7565) (0ab640ce3) -- Fabian Braun
 * require Django >= 3.2 (#7562) (a77358b93) -- Fabian Braun
 * respect pre-set (48353c2d6) -- Fabian Braun
 * lint menus app (#7534) (927b60b47) -- Vinit Kumar
 * remove curly bracket left behind on PR 7488 (#7529) (123f7df91) -- Corentin Bettiol

 Statistics:
 -----------

 This release includes 45 pull requests, and was created with the help of the following contributors (in alphabetical order):

 * ChengDaqi2023 (1 pull request)
 * Corentin Bettiol (1 pull request)
 * Fabian Braun (30 pull requests)
 * Github Release Action (3 pull requests)
 * Vinit Kumar (3 pull requests)
 * caption (1 pull request)
 * dependabot[bot] (0 pull request)
 * mihalikv (1 pull request)
 * suryadev99 (1 pull request)
>>>>>>> origin/develop

Thanks to all contributors for their efforts!


************************
How to upgrade to
************************

We assume you are upgrading from django CMS 3.11.3.

Please make sure that your current database is consistent and in a healthy
state, and **make a copy of the database before proceeding further.**

Check your settings of `CMS_LANGUAGES` (if used), as it was ignored by default in preceding versions.
For more information, please see: https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/6795

Then run::

    python manage.py migrate  # to ensure that your database is up-to-date with migrations
    python manage.py cms fix-tree

Check custom code and third-party applications for use of deprecated or removed functionality or
APIs (see above). Some third-party components may need to be updated.

Install the new version of django CMS from GitHub or via pip.

Run::

    python manage.py migrate

to apply the new migrations.
