.. _upgrade-to-3.2.2:

###################
3.2.2 release notes
###################

*******************
What's new in 3.2.2
*******************

Improvements
============

- Substantial "under-the-hood" improvements to the page tree resulting in
  significant reduction of page-tree reloads and generally cleaner code
- Update jsTree version to 3.2.1 with slight adaptations to the page tree
- Improve the display and usability of the language menu, especially in cases
  where there are many languages
- Documentation improvements


Bug Fixes
=========

- Fix an issue relating to search fields in plugins
- Fix an issue where the app-resolver would trigger locales into migrations
- Fix cache settings
- Fix ToolbarMiddleware.is_cms_request logic
- Fix numerous Django 1.9 deprecations
- Numerous other improvements to overall stability and code quality


Model Relationship Back-References and Django 1.9
=================================================

Django 1.9 is lot stricter about collisions in the ``related_names`` of
relationship fields than previous versions of Django. This has brought to light
issues in django CMS relating to the private field ``CMSPlugin.cmsplugin_ptr``.
The issue becomes apparent when multiple packages are installed that provide
plugins with the same model class name. A good example would be if you have the
package ``djangocms-file`` installed, which has a poorly named CMSPlugin model
subclass called ``File``, then any other package that has a plugin with a
field named "file" would most likely cause an issue. Considering that
``djangocms-file`` is a very common plugin to use and a field name of "file" is
not uncommon in other plugins, this is less than ideal.

Fortunately, developers can correct these issues in their own projects while
they await improvements in django CMS. There is an internal field that is
created when instantiating plugins: ``CMSPlugin.cmsplugin_ptr``. This private
field is declared in the CMSPlugin base class and is populated on instantiation
using the lower-cased model name of the CMSPlugin subclass that is
being registered.

A subclass to ``CMSPlugin`` can declare their own ``cmsplugin_ptr`` field to
immediately fix this issue. The easiest solution is to declare this field with a
``related_name`` of "+". In typical Django fashion, this will suppress the
back-reference and prevent any collisions. However, if the back-reference is
required for some reason (very rare), then we recommend using the pattern
``%(app_label)s_%(class_name)s``. In fact, in version 3.3 of django CMS, this is
precisely the string-template that the reference setup will use to create the
name. Here's an example:

.. code-block:: python

    class MyPlugin(CMSPlugin):
        class Meta:
            app_label = 'my_package'

        cmsplugin_ptr = models.OneToOneField(
            CMSPlugin,
            related_name='my_package_my_plugin',
            parent_link=True
        )

        # other fields, etc.
        # ...

Please note that CMSPlugin.cmsplugin_ptr will remain a private field.


Notice of Upcoming Change in 3.3
================================

As outlined in the section immediately above, the pattern currently used to
derive a ``related_name`` for the private field ``CMSPlugin.cmsplugin_ptr`` may
result in frequent collisions. In django CMS 3.3, this string-template will be
changed to utilise both the ``app_label`` and the model class name. In the
majority of cases, this will not affect developers or users, but if your
project uses these back-references for some reason, please be aware of this
change and plan accordingly.


Treebeard corruption
====================

Prior to 3.2.1 moving or pasting nested plugins could lead to some non-fatal
tree corruptions, raising an error when adding plugins under the newly
pasted plugins.

To fix these problems, upgrade to 3.2.1 or later and then run
``manage.py cms fix-tree`` command to repair the tree.


DjangoCMS Text CKEditor
=======================

Action required
---------------
CMS 3.2.2 is not compatible with djangocms-text-ckeditor < 2.8.1.
If you're using djangocms-text-ckeditor, please upgrade to 2.8.1 or up.
