.. _upgrade-to-3.2:

#################
3.2 release notes
#################

django CMS 3.2 introduces touch-screen support, significant improvements to the structure-board,
and numerous other updates and fixes for the frontend. Behind the scenes, auto-reloading following
apphook configuration changes will make life simpler for all users.

.. warning:: Upgrading from previous versions

    3.2 introduces some changes that **require** action if you are upgrading
    from a previous version. Please read :ref:`upgrade-guide-3.2` for a step-by-step guide to the
    process of upgrading from 3.1 to 3.2.


*****************
What's new in 3.2
*****************

* :ref:`new welcome page <create-first-page>` to help new users
* touch-screen support for most editing interfaces, for sizes from small tablets to table-top
  devices
* enhanced and polished user interface
* much-needed improvements to the structure-board
* enhancements to components such as the pop-up plugin editor, sideframe (now called the *overlay*)
  and the toolbar
* significant speed improvements on loading, HTTP requests and file sizes
* restarts are no longer required when changing apphook configurations
* a new content wizard system, adaptable to arbitrary content types


******************************
Changes that require attention
******************************

Touch interface support
=======================

For general information about touch interface support, see the :ref:`touch screen device notes
<touch>` in the documentation.

.. important::

    These notes about touch interface support apply only to the **django CMS admin and editing
    interfaces**. The visitor-facing published site is **wholly independent** of this, and the
    responsibility of the site developer. A good site should already work well for its visitors,
    whatever interface they use!

Numerous aspects of the CMS and its interface have been updated to work well with touch-screen
devices. There are some restrictions and warnings that need to be borne in mind.


Device support
--------------

Smaller devices such as most phones are too small to be adequately usable. For example, your Apple
Watch is sadly unlikely to provide a very good django CMS editing experience.

Older devices will often lack the performance to support a usefully responsive frontend
editing/administration interface.

There are some device-specific issues still to be resolved. Some of these relate to the CKEditor
(the default django CMS text editor). We will continue to work on these and they will be addressed
in a future release.

See :ref:`device-support` for information about devices that have been tested and confirmed to
work well, and about known issues affecting touch-screen device support.


Feedback required
-----------------

We've tested the CMS interface extensively, but will be very keen to have feedback from other users
- device reports, bug reports and general suggestions and opinions are very welcome.


Bug-fixes
=========

* An issue in which ``{% placeholder %}`` template tags ignored the ``lang`` parameter has been
  fixed.

  However this may affect the behaviour of your templates, as now a previously-ignored
  parameter will be recognised. If you used the ``lang`` parameter in these template tags you may
  be affected: check the behaviour of your templates after upgrading.


Content wizards
===============

:doc:`/reference/wizards` can help simplify production of content, and can be created to handle
non-CMS content too.

For a quick introduction to using a wizard as a content editor, see the :ref:`user tutorial
<create-first-page>`.



Renaming cms_app, cms_toolbar, menu modules
===========================================

``cms_app.py``, ``cms_toolbar.py`` and ``menu.py`` have been renamed to
``cms_apps.py``, ``cms_toolbars.py`` and ``cms_menus.py`` for consistency.

Old names are still supported but deprecated; support will be removed in 3.4.


Action required
---------------

In your own applications that use these modules, rename ``cms_app.py`` to ``cms_apps.py``,
``cms_toolbar.py`` to ``cms_toolbars.py`` and ``menu.py`` to ``menus.py``.


New ``ApphookReloadMiddleware``
===============================

Until now, changes to apphooks have required a restart of the server in order to take effect. A new
optional middleware class, :ref:`ApphookReloadMiddleware`, makes this automatic.


For developers
==============

Various improvements have been implemented to make developing with and for django CMS easier. These
include:

* improvements to frontend code, to comply better with `aldryn-boilerplate-bootstrap3
  <https://github.com/aldryn/aldryn-boilerplate-bootstrap3>`_

* changes to directory structure for frontend related components such as JavaScript and SASS.

* We no longer use ``develop.py``; we now use ``manage.py`` for all development tasks. See
  :ref:`contributing_patch` for examples.

* We've moved our ``widgets.py`` JavaScript to ``static/cms/js/widgets``.


Code formatting
---------------

We've switched from tabs (in some places) to four spaces *everywhere*. See :ref:`contributing-code`
for more on formatting.


gulp.js
-------

We now use :ref:`gulp.js <js_linting>` for linting, compressing and bundling of frontend files.


Sass-related changes
--------------------

We now use `LibSass <https://github.com/sass/libsass>`_ rather than Compass for building static
files (this only affects frontend developers *of* django CMS - contributors to it, not other users
or developers). We've also adopted `CSSComb <http://csscomb.com>`_.


``.editorconfig`` file
----------------------

We've added a ``.editorconfig`` (at the root of the project) to provide cues to text editors.


Automated spelling checks for documentation
-------------------------------------------

Documentation is now checked for spelling. A ``make spelling`` command is available now when
working on documentation, and our `Travis Continuous Integration server
<https://travis-ci.org/divio/django-cms>`_ also runs these checks.

See the :ref:`spelling` section in the documentation.


New structure board
===================

The structure board is cleaner and easier to understand. It now displays its elements in a tree,
rather than in a series of nested boxes.

You can optionally enable the old appearance and behaviour with the
:ref:`CMS_TOOLBAR_SIMPLE_STRUCTURE_MODE` setting (this option will be removed in 3.3).


Replaced the sideframe with an overlay
======================================

The sideframe that could be expanded and collapsed to reveal a view of the admin and other controls
has been replaced by a simpler and more elegant *overlay* mechanism.

The API documentation still refers to the ``sideframe``, because it is invoked in the same way, and
what has changed is merely the behaviour in the user's browser.

In other words, *sideframe* and the *overlay* refer to different versions of the same thing.


New startup page
================

A new startup mode makes it easier for users (especially new users) to dive straight into editing
when launching a new site. See the :ref:`user-tutorial` for more.


************
Known issues
************

The `sub-pages of a page with an apphook will be unreachable
<https://github.com/divio/django-cms/issues/4758>`_ (``404 page not found``), due to internal URL
resolution mechanisms in the CMS. Though it's unlikely that most users will need sub-pages of this
kind (typically, an apphooked page will create its own sub-pages) this issue will be addressed in a
forthcoming release.


*****************************
Backward-incompatible changes
*****************************

See the :ref:`Frontend code <contributing_frontend>` documentation.

There are no other known backward-incompatible changes.


.. _upgrade-guide-3.2:

*******************************
Upgrading django CMS 3.1 to 3.2
*******************************

Please note any changes that require action above, and take action accordingly.

A database migration is required (a new model, ``UrlconfRevision`` has been added as part of the
apphook reload mechanism):

Note also that any third-party applications you update may have their own migrations, so as always,
before upgrading, please make sure that your current database is consistent and in a healthy state,
and **make a copy of the database before proceeding further.**

Then run::

    python manage.py migrate

to migrate.

Otherwise django CMS 3.2 represents a fairly easy upgrade path.

********************
Pending deprecations
********************

In django CMS 3.3:

    Django 1.6, 1.7 and Python 2.6 will no longer be supported. If you still using these versions,
    you are strongly encouraged to begin exploring the upgrade process to a newer version.

    The :ref:`CMS_TOOLBAR_SIMPLE_STRUCTURE_MODE` setting will be removed.
