.. _upgrade-to-3.3.1:

###################
3.3.1 release notes
###################

*******************
What's new in 3.3.1
*******************

Bug Fixes
=========

* Fixed a bug when clicking inside sideframe didn't close toolbar dropdowns
* Fixed a bug where saving errors wouldn't be shown in the modal window.
* Fixed a misleading message when modal iframe contents couldn't be accessed.
* Added a workaround for a bug when plugins couldn't be deleted in Firefox
  with 1Password extension installed
* Changed CMS JavaScript bundling from simple concatenation to webpack-based.
  Using CMS Javascript modules directly is no longer possible.
* Fixed an issue where plugins that have no immediate DOM representation
  wouldn't be editable or movable.
* Fixed a regression in which plugins that defined ``parent_classes``
  would not show up in the structure mode.
* Backported a performance fix from Django to avoid extra queries when
  plugins access their parent via the parent link field ``cmsplugin_ptr``.
* Fixed typo in ``AdvancedSettingsForm`` error messages.
* Fixed long standing bug that prevented apphook endspoints from being
  CSRF exempt.
* Changed default value for ``CMS_INTERNAL_IPS``.
* Fixed an issue that prevented non superusers from copying all plugins
  in a placeholder.
* Fixed an issue where plugin permissions where not checked when clearing
  a placeholder.
* Fixed an issue where plugin permissions where not checked when deleting
  a page or page translation.
* Fixed a useless placeholders edit permissions checking when not in edit
  mode.
* Fixed a bug where users with limited permissions could not interact with
  page tree dropdowns.
* Fixed a bug where Django Compressor could not be used on the sekizai ``js``
  block.
* Fixed an issue when plugin that is aliased on the same page couldn't be
  operated upon in the structure mode.
* Removed globally unique constraint for Apphook configs.
* Fixed an encoding error when running the ``publisher-publish`` command.
* Fixed ``render_model`` template tags to work with models containing deferred
  fields.
* Fixed regression introduced in 3.3.0 when using the
  ``render_plugin_toolbar_config`` template tag directly.
* Fixed error in retrieving placeholder label from configuration.
* Adjusted migrations to no longer use models directly.
* Fixed pickling support for plugins.
* Updated contributing policy documentation.
* Fixed several documentation typos.
* Changed all readthedocs links to use ``.io`` instead of ``.org``
* Fixed text overflow in the page tree dropdown menu.


Features
========

* Added a warning for users who are leaving the page or closing the plugin
  modal by pressing ESC to prevent accidental loss of content.
* Added support for tiered ``CMS_PLACEHOLDER_CONF``.
* Introduced new logic to leverage Django's dynamic related name
  functionality on ``CMSPlugin`` subclasses for the parent link field.
