.. _upgrade-to-3.4.2:

###################
3.4.2 release notes
###################

django CMS 3.4.2 introduces two key new features: *Revert to live* for pages, and support for Django 1.10

*Revert to live* is in fact being reintroduced in a new form following a complete rewrite of our revision handling
system, that was removed in :ref:`django CMS 3.4 <upgrade-to-3.4>` to make possible a greatly-improved new
implementation from scratch.

*Revert to live* is the first step in fully re-implementing revision management on a new basis.

The full set of changes is listed below.

*******************
What's new in 3.4.2
*******************

Bug Fixes
=========

* Escaped strings in ``close_frame`` JS template.
* Fixed a bug with `text-transform` styles on inputs affecting CMS login
* Fixed a typo in the confirmation message for copying plugins from a different
  language
* Fixed a bug which prevented certain migrations from running in a multi-db setup.
* Fixed a regression which prevented the ``Page`` model from rendering correctly
  when used in a ``raw_id_field``.
* Fixed a regression which caused the CMS to cache the toolbar when ``CMS_PAGE_CACHE``
  was set to ``True`` and an anonymous user had ``cms_edit`` set to ``True`` on their session.
* Fixed a regression which prevented users from overriding content in an inherited
  placeholder.
* Fixed a bug affecting Firefox for Macintosh users, in which use of the Command key later followed by Return would
  trigger a plugin save.
* Fixed a bug where template inheritance setting creates spurious migration (see #3479)
* Fixed a bug which prevented the page from being marked as dirty (pending changes)
  when changing the value of the overwrite url field.
* Fixed a bug where the page tree would not update correctly when a sibling page was moved
  from left to right or right to left.

Improvements and new features
=============================

* Added official support for Django 1.10.
* Rewrote manual installation how-to documentation
* Re-introduced the "Revert to live" menu option.
* Added support for django-reversion >= 2 (see #5830)
* Improved the ``fix-tree`` command so that it also fixes non-root nodes (pages).
* Introduced placeholder operation signals.

Deprecations
============

* Removed the deprecated ``add_url()``, ``edit_url()``, ``move_url()``, ``delete_url()``, ``copy_url()`` properties of
  CMSPlugin model.
* Added a deprecation warning to method ``render_plugin()`` in class ``CMSPlugin``.
* Deprecated ``frontend_edit_template`` attribute of ``CMSPluginBase``.
* The ``post_`` methods in ```PlaceholderAdminMixin`` have been deprecated in favor of
  placeholder operation signals.

Other changes
=============

* Adjusted Ajax calls triggered when performing a placeholder operation (add plugin, etc..) to include
  a GET query called cms_path. This query points to the path where the operation originates from.
* Changed CMSPlugin.get_parent_classes() from method to classmethod.
