.. _upgrade-to-3.4.4:

###################
3.4.4 release notes
###################



*******************
What's new in 3.4.4
*******************

Bug Fixes
=========

* Fixed a bug in which cancelling the publishing dialog wasn't respected.
* Fixed a bug causing post-login redirection to an incorrect URL on single-language sites.
* Fixed an error when retrieving placeholder label from configuration.
* Fixed a bug which caused certain translations to display double-escaped text in the page
  list admin view.
* Adjusted the toolbar JavaScript template to escape values coming from the request.
* Replaced all custom markup on the ``admin/cms/page/includes/fieldset.html`` template
  with an ``{% include %}`` call to Django's built-in ``fieldset.html`` template.
* Fixed a bug which prevented a page from being marked as dirty when a placeholder was cleared.
* Fixed an IntegrityError raised when publishing a page with no public version and whose publisher
  state was pending.
* Fixed an issue with JavaScript not being able to determine correct path to the async bundle
* Fixed a ``DoesNotExist`` database error raised when moving a page marked as published, but whose public
  translation did not exist.
* Fixed a bug in which the menu rendered nodes using the site session variable (set in the admin),
  instead of the current request site.
* Fixed a race condition bug in which the database cache keys were deleted without syncing with the
  cache server, and as a result old menu items would continue to be displayed.
* Fixed a 404 raised when using the ``Delete`` button for a Page or Title extension on Django >= 1.9
* Fixed a performance issue with nested pages when using the ``inherit`` flag on the ``{% placeholder %}`` tag.
* Fixed a bug in which the placeholder cache was not consistently cleared when a page was published.
* Fixed a regression which prevented users from setting a redirect to the homepage.


Improvements and new features
=============================

* Enhanced the plugin menu to not show plugins the user does not have permission to add.
* Added Dropdown class to toolbar items.
* Added "How to serve multiple languages" section to documentation.


******************************
Backwards incompatible changes
******************************


CMSPluginBase class
===================

* Changed the signature for internal ``cms.plugin_base.CMSPluginBase`` methods ``get_child_classes``
  and ``get_parent_classes`` to take an optional ``instance`` parameter.


Page model
==========

The following methods have been removed from the ``Page`` model:

* ``reset_to_live``
  This internal method was removed and replaced with ``revert_to_live``.


Placeholder utilities
=====================

Because of a performance issue with placeholder inheritance,
we've altered the return value for the following internal placeholder utility functions:

* ``cms.utils.placeholder._scan_placeholders``
  This will now return a list of ``Placeholder`` tag instances instead of a list of placeholder slot names.
  You can get the slot name by calling the ``get_name()`` method on the ``Placeholder`` tag instance.

* ``cms.utils.placeholder.get_placeholders``
  This will now return a list of ``DeclaredPlaceholder`` instances instead of a list of placeholder slot names.
  You can get the slot name by accessing the ``slot`` attribute on the ``DeclaredPlaceholder`` instance.
