.. _upgrade-to-3.4:

#################
3.4 release notes
#################

The most significant change in this release is the removal of revision support
(i.e. undo/redo/recover functionality on pages) from the core django CMS. This
functionality will be reinstated as an optional addon in due course, but in the
meantime, that functionality is not available.

.. _whats_new_3.4:

*****************
What's new in 3.4
*****************

* Changed the way CMS plugins are rendered. The HTML ``div`` with
  ``cms-plugin`` class is no longer rendered around every CMS plugin. Instead a
  combination of ``template`` tags and JavaScript is used to add event handlers
  and plugin data directly to the plugin markup. This fixes most of the
  rendering issues caused by the extra markup.
* Changed asset cache-busting implementation, which is now handled by a path change,
  rather than the ``GET`` parameter.
* Added the option to copy pages in the page tree using the drag and drop
  interface.
* Made it possible to use multi-table inheritance for Page/Title extensions.
* Refactored plugin rendering functionality to speed up loading time in both
  structure and content modes.
* Added a new ``Shift`` + ``Space`` shortcut to switch between structure and
  content mode while highlighting the current plugin, revealing its position.
* Improved keyboard navigation
* Added help modal about available shortcuts
* Added fuzzy matching to the plugin picker.
* Changed the ``downcast_plugins`` utility to return a generator instead of a
  list.
* Fixed a bug that caused an aliased placeholder to show in structure mode.
* Fixed a bug that prevented aliased content from showing correctly without
  publishing the page first.
* Added help text to an ``Alias`` plugin change form when attached to a page
  to show the content editor where the content is aliased from.
* Removed revision support from django CMS core.
  As a result both ``CMS_MAX_PAGE_HISTORY_REVERSIONS`` and ``CMS_MAX_PAGE_PUBLISH_REVERSIONS``
  settings are no longer supported, as well as the ``with_revision`` parameter
  in ``cms.api.create_page`` and ``cms.api.create_title``.
* In ``cms.plugin_base.CMSPluginBase`` methods ``get_child_classes`` and ``get_parent_classes`` now
  are implemented as a ``@classmethod``.

.. _backward_incompatible_3.4:

****************
Upgrading to 3.4
****************

A database migration is required because the default value of CMSPlugin.position was set to 0 instead of null.

Please make sure that your current database is consistent and in a healthy
state, and **make a copy of the database before proceeding further.**

Then run::

    python manage.py migrate
    python manage.py cms fix-tree


*****************************
Backward incompatible changes
*****************************

Apphooks & Toolbars
===================

As per our deprecation policy we've now removed the backwards compatible shim
for ``cms_app.py`` and ``cms_toolbar.py``.
If you have not done so already, please rename these to ``cms_apps.py`` and ``cms_toolbars.py``.


Permissions
===========

The permissions system was heavily refactored. As a result, several internal
functions and methods have been removed or changed.

Functions removed:

 * ``user_has_page_add_perm``
 * ``has_page_add_permission``
 * ``has_page_add_permission_from_request``
 * ``has_any_page_change_permissions``
 * ``has_auth_page_permission``
 * ``has_page_change_permission``
 * ``has_global_page_permission``
 * ``has_global_change_permissions_permission``
 * ``has_generic_permission``
 * ``load_view_restrictions``
 * ``get_any_page_view_permissions``


The following methods were changed to require a user parameter instead of a request:

 * ``Page.has_view_permission``
 * ``Page.has_add_permission``
 * ``Page.has_change_permission``
 * ``Page.has_delete_permission``
 * ``Page.has_delete_translation_permission``
 * ``Page.has_publish_permission``
 * ``Page.has_advanced_settings_permission``
 * ``Page.has_change_permissions_permission``
 * ``Page.has_move_page_permission``

These are also deprecated in favor of their counterparts in ``cms.utils.page_permissions``.

To keep consistency with both django CMS permissions and Django permissions,
we've modified the vanilla permissions system (``CMS_PERMISSIONS = False``)
to require users to have certain Django permissions to perform an action.

Here's an overview:

============ ==================================
Action       Permission required
============ ==================================
Add Page     Can Add Page & Can Change Page
Change Page  Can Change Page
Delete Page  Can Change Page & Can Delete Page
Move Page    Can Change Page
Publish Page Can Change Page & Can Publish Page
============ ==================================

This change will only affect non-superuser staff members.

.. warning::

    If you have a custom ``Page`` extension with a configured toolbar,
    please see the updated :ref:`example <complete_toolbar_api>`.
    It uses the new permission internals.


Manual plugin rendering
=======================

We've rewritten the way plugins and placeholders are rendered.
As a result, if you're manually rendering plugins and placeholders
you'll have to adapt your code to match the new rendering mechanism.

To render a plugin programmatically, you will need a context and request object.

.. warning:: Manual plugin rendering is not a public API, and as such it's subject to change without notice.

         ::

             from django.template import RequestContext
             from cms.plugin_rendering import ContentRenderer

             def render_plugin(request, plugin):
                 renderer = ContentRenderer(request)
                 context = RequestContext(request)
                 # Avoid errors if plugin require a request object
                 # when rendering.
                 context['request'] = request
                 return renderer.render_plugin(plugin, context)

Like a plugin, to render a placeholder programmatically, you will need a context and request object.


.. warning:: Manual placeholder rendering is not a public API, and as such it's subject to change without notice.

             ::

                 from django.template import RequestContext
                 from cms.plugin_rendering import ContentRenderer

                 def render_placeholder(request, placeholder):
                     renderer = ContentRenderer(request)
                     context = RequestContext(request)
                     # Avoid errors if plugin require a request object
                     # when rendering.
                     context['request'] = request
                     content = renderer.render_placeholder(
                        placeholder,
                        context=context,
                     )
                     return content
