.. _upgrade-to-5.0.7:

###################
5.0.7 release notes
###################

*May 5, 2026*

Welcome to django CMS 5.0.7!

These release notes cover the new features, as well as some backwards
incompatible changes you'll want to be aware of when upgrading from
django CMS 4.1 or earlier. We've begun the deprecation process for some
features.

*******************************
Django and Python compatibility
*******************************

django CMS supports **Django 4.2, 5.0, 5.1, 5.2, and 6.0**. We highly recommend and only
support the latest release of each series.

It supports **Python 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13**. As for Django we highly recommend and only
support the latest release of each series.

***********************
How to upgrade to 5.0.7
***********************

Update your project’s ``requirements.txt`` file to require (at least) django CMS 5.0.3 and
run ``pip install -r requirements.txt``.

If you are upgrading from an earlier version of django CMS, read the release
notes for all the versions between your current version and this one. Check
the :ref:`release notes <release-notes>` for each version to see if there are
any special instructions.

Run migrations::

    python -m manage migrate

*******************
What's new in 5.0.7
*******************

Bug Fixes:
----------

* Keep GET params when toggling structure mode by @petrklus in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8497
* slug and overwrite_url caching failed in read-only change_views (#8507) by @fsbraun in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8509
* Add missing pin icon for external placeholders by @fsbraun in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8520
* Chunk size was missing for plugin queryset.iterator() (#8532) by @fsbraun in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8533
* Proxy models of `CMSPlugin` were not downcasted correctly (#8539) by @fsbraun in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8541
* Inline editing could circumvent permissions (#8542) by @fsbraun in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8553
* Fallback languages rendered empty (when not redirecting) by @fsbraun in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8558
* DiffDOM sometimes left garbled head section by @fsbraun in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8562
* Add `page_title` parameter to `cms.api.create_page` function (#8567) by @fsbraun in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8572
* XSS vulnerability in validator error message (#8576) by @fsbraun in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8580
* Deleting a non-local plugin did not refresh the screen (#8582) by @fsbraun in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8586
* Compatibility shim for Page.objects.order_by used non-existing fields by @fsbraun in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8598
* Convert value to string in ApplicationConfigSelect. (#8594) by @fsbraun in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8601
* Migrations with a custom user model caused a Programming error (#8606) by @fsbraun in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8608
* deadlock could happen on moving large pagesubtrees (#8529) by @fsbraun in https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/pull/8610

Statistics:
-----------

This release includes 15 pull requests, and was created with the help of the following contributors (in alphabetical order):

* Fabian Braun (15 pull request)

With the review help of the following contributors:

* Vinit Kumar

Thanks to all contributors for their efforts!

