.. _upgrade-to-5.0.9:

###################
5.0.9 release notes
###################

*June 9, 2026*

Welcome to django CMS 5.0.8!

These release notes cover the new features, as well as some backwards
incompatible changes you'll want to be aware of when upgrading from
django CMS 4.1 or earlier. We've begun the deprecation process for some
features.

*******************************
Django and Python compatibility
*******************************

django CMS supports **Django 4.2, 5.0, 5.1, 5.2, and 6.0**. We highly recommend and only
support the latest release of each series.

It supports **Python 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13**. As for Django we highly recommend and only
support the latest release of each series.

***********************
How to upgrade to 5.0.9
***********************

Update your project’s ``requirements.txt`` file to require (at least) django CMS 5.0.8 and
run ``pip install -r requirements.txt``.

If you are upgrading from an earlier version of django CMS, read the release
notes for all the versions between your current version and this one. Check
the :ref:`release notes <release-notes>` for each version to see if there are
any special instructions.

Run migrations::

    python -m manage migrate

*******************
What's new in 5.0.9
*******************

Read-only slugs for shared URLs
-------------------------------

Previously, editing a page in the admin could silently change the URL of a
published version when both versions shared the same slug or overwrite URL
(#8640). To prevent this, the **slug** and **overwrite URL** fields are now
rendered read-only whenever a page content's URL is shared with a published
version. The fields display explanatory help text describing how to make them
editable again, and locked URLs are no longer updated on save even if different
slug data is posted (#8654).

Security Fixes
--------------

This release fixes two security issues. We recommend that all users upgrade as
soon as possible.

* **Missing authorization on structure, move and clipboard endpoints (#8644).**
  The placeholder structure, plugin move, and clipboard endpoints did not
  consistently enforce permission checks. This could allow users without the
  required permissions to read or manipulate plugins on a page. Authorization is
  now enforced on these endpoints.
* **Plugin-declared Vary headers ignored in the page cache key (#8646).**
  The page cache key did not honour ``Vary`` headers declared by plugins. As a
  result cached responses could be served to requests that should have received
  a different, varied response (for example content that varies by cookie or
  other request headers). Plugin-declared ``Vary`` headers are now included in
  the cache key.

Many thanks to the security researchers who responsibly reported these issues:
`@mauriceng98 <https://github.com/mauriceng98>`_,
`@lzhou1110 <https://github.com/lzhou1110>`_,
`@Zyy0530 <https://github.com/Zyy0530>`_,
`@Str1ckl4nd <https://github.com/Str1ckl4nd>`_, and
`@7thParkk <https://github.com/7thParkk>`_.

.. note::

   As ever, we remind our users and contributors that all security reports,
   patches and concerns be addressed only to our security team by email, at
   `security@django-cms.org <mailto:security@django-cms.org>`_. Please do not
   report security issues on the public issue tracker or any mailing list. See
   our `security policy <https://github.com/django-cms/django-cms/blob/main/SECURITY.md>`_
   for details.

Bug Fixes:
----------
* Enforce authorization on structure, move and clipboard endpoints (#8644) (#8645) (7642a98ab) -- Fabian Braun
* GrouperModelAdmin shadowed prepopulated_fields class attribute (#8636) (#8639) (1b164a488) -- Fabian Braun
* Honour plugin-declared Vary headers in the page cache key (#8646) (#8647) (d5dc1efa1) -- Fabian Braun
* Missing redirect_url in CMSNavigationNode.attr (#8625) (f975cace5) -- Venelin Stoykov
* Release script dropped changes (#8655) (23df299bd) -- Fabian Braun
* Slugs of published pages could be changed (#8640) (#8654) (9fed876a0) -- Fabian Braun
* Transifex upload script failed (#8656) (936a620ef) -- Fabian Braun
* template-specific CMS_PLACEHOLDER_CONF keys ignored when rendering page placeholders (#8652) (c7424f7f2) -- Ralph
* Correct lookup prefix and register length lookup in PermissionTuple.allow_list()
* Use loop variable instead of queryset in user_can_delete_page placeholder check
* Return 404 instead of 500 for missing objects in delete_view and edit_title_fields
* Use target language for position shift and cache clearing in _paste_placeholder

Statistics:
-----------

This release includes 14 pull requests, and was created with the help of the following contributors (in alphabetical order):

* Fabian Braun (8 pull requests)
* Ralph (1 pull request)
* Venelin Stoykov (1 pull request)

With the review help of the following contributors:

* Fabian Braun
* Vinit Kumar

Thanks to all contributors for their efforts!