.. _upgrade-to-5.0.0:

###################
5.0.0 release notes
###################

*May 12, 2025*

Welcome to django CMS 5.0.0!

These release notes cover the new features, as well as some backwards
incompatible changes you'll want to be aware of when upgrading from
django CMS 4.1 or earlier. We've begun the deprecation process for some
features.

*******************************
Django and Python compatibility
*******************************

django CMS supports **Django 4.2, 5.0, 5.1, and 5.2**. We highly recommend and only
support the latest release of each series.

It supports **Python 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, and 3.13**. As for Django we highly recommend and only
support the latest release of each series.

***********************
How to upgrade to 5.0.0
***********************

Update your project’s ``requirements.txt`` file to require (at least) django CMS 5.0.0 and
run ``pip install -r requirements.txt``.

If you are upgrading from an earlier version of django CMS, read the release
notes for all the versions between your current version and this one. Check
the :ref:`release notes <release-notes>` for each version to see if there are
any special instructions.

Run migrations::

    python -m manage migrate

.. warning::

    Since the migrations merge the ``TreeNode`` and ``Page`` models, you should run the
    migration in a test environment first to ensure that the migration runs
    successfully.


*******************
What's new in 5.0.0
*******************

Editor experience: Improved turn-around times
=============================================

Significant improvements have been made to enhance the editor experience by
reducing turn-around times.

Faster plugin addition
----------------------

In django CMS 5.0.0, adding child plugins has been made easier when only one plugin
type is allowed. When adding a plugin to a placeholder, there is no need for a
plugin selector modal if only one plugin is available. Now in this situation the
plugin selector modal is skipped, streamlining the process. Typical use cases include
"nested" plugins such as accordions, rows with columns, and similar structures.

Additionally, if the plugin form contains no fields to edit or has default values for
all fields, a plugin can be created without add plugin form. To enable this quick creation
of content, set the plugin's property :attr:`~cms.plugin_base.CMSPluginBase.show_add_form` to
``False``.

Improved plugin updates
-----------------------

One of the key changes is the introduction of a new mechanism for handling plugin data updates.
This mechanism reduces the number request-response cycles and optimizes the rendering process,
resulting in faster load times and more responsive interactions when managing content. Editors will
benefit from a more efficient and enjoyable editing workflow, with quicker updates by a factor of roughly
two and smoother transitions between editing tasks.

Full content updates are only necessary for so-called "non-local" changes. Plugins that
change content at other places than its position on the page or its children, can be
marked by setting the new :attr:`~cms.plugin_base.CMSPluginBase.is_local` attribute to
``False``. This will trigger a full content update if the plugin is changed. An example
of a non-local change is a plugin that adds a title to a table of contents. If changed,
both the title itself and the table of contents need to be updated.

Less server load
----------------

Global caching of plugin restrictions improves the server response time by ~100ms after
changing a plugin.

Plugin restrictions need to be recalculated on every request in edit and structure
mode, which is of n² complexity (n: number of plugins). While the plugin restrictions
can be widely customized, the standard implementation respects the
:setting:`CMS_PLACEHOLDER_CONF` setting, allowing restrictions to depend on template
and slot names. This release caches these restrictions globally in the plugin pool
for all plugins that follow the standard implementation, i.e., plugins that do not
override the ``get_require_parent()``, ``get_parent_classes()``,
``get_child_class_overrides()``, or ``get_child_classes()`` methods.

Performance: Optimized database access
======================================

To enhance database performance, one of the key changes is the **merging of the**
``TreeNode`` **model into the** ``Page`` **model**. This change simplifies database accesses and
improves performance by reducing the number of joins required for common queries. As a result,
page-related operations are faster and more efficient. Compatibility shims have been
added to ensure that custom code accessing the `Page.node` attribute continues to work
and will reference back to the page itself.

Additionally, this release optimizes the number of queries needed for the **edit and structure
endpoints** to improve responsiveness and the editor experience. When rendering plugins, django CMS
first needs to get the plugin tree (``CMSPlugin`` instances) for each placeholder, and then turn
each of the plugins into its actual class, such as ``Text`` or ``Picture``, by getting the plugin
models from the database. This process is called downcasting. When downcasting plugins are now
queried by their concrete model, benefiting plugins that use proxy models, such as
``djangocms-frontend`` or ``djangocms-cascade``. Downcasting is fully avoided for plugins without
a model. During downcasting, the cache for parent references is prepopulated with downcasted parent
plugins, avoiding database hits when plugin templates access ``plugin.parent``. Note that after
downcasting ``plugin.parent`` now returns a downcasted plugin, not a ``CMSPlugin`` instance.

Plugin renderers now cache their page's template name, necessary to respect the
:setting:`CMS_PLACEHOLDER_CONF` setting, solving an n+1 issue that led to a page object being
fetched for each plugin type used. The ``Placeholder`` model's internal code has been simplified
to reduce the number of database hits. Its manager's ``get_for_obj()`` method now automatically
prepopulates the cache for the source field of fetched placeholders, solving another n+1 issue
when accessing ``placeholder.source``.

Security: Improved content security policy support
==================================================

Earlier versions of django CMS added inline JavaScript to the page in edit mode to
communicate with the frontend editor. This effectively barred projects from enforcing
meaningful content security policies. In django CMS 5.0.0, we have removed all inline
JavaScript from the edit mode (or other places in django CMS core), replacing it with
text/json objects to communicate with the frontend editor. This allows projects to
enforce strict Content Security Policies (CSP) without any issues.

For a fully working project, it is also important that other packages used, especially
plugins, do not rely on inline JavaScript. This change enhances the security
posture of your django CMS projects by enabling the use of CSP headers to mitigate
cross-site scripting (XSS) and other code injection attacks.

Use cases: Full Headless support
================================

Django CMS 5.0.0 is headless-ready, allowing you to use django CMS as a backend
service to provide content to the frontend technology of your choice. Traditionally,
django CMS serves the content as HTML pages. In headless mode, django CMS does not
publish the HTML page tree. Instead, you can retrieve content via an API, such as
`djangocms-rest <https://github.com/django-cms/djangocms-rest>`_.

To run django CMS in headless mode, remove the catch-all URL pattern from your
project's `urls.py` file and replace it with an API endpoint. This allows django
CMS to be fully accessible through the admin interface while serving content
exclusively through the API.

Additionally, you can continue running a hybrid mode where both HTML pages and API
content are served.

See :ref:`headless_mode`.

Development: Exception handling
===============================

Since django CMS 4, exceptions that happen during plugin rendering have been
caught and displayed a message at the plugin's position. After feedback from
the community, django CMS 5.0 refactored exception handling.

* Exceptions are now caught on placeholder level.

* In edit mode, a message about the exception is shown for the placeholder. If
  ``settings.DEBUG == True`` this message includes the full Django trace.

* Editors still can edit plugins causing the exception. It can be edited by
  double-clicking the error message or through the structure board.

* In preview mode and on site, the placeholder containing the plugin will
  render empty.

* If :setting:`CMS_CATCH_PLUGIN_500_EXCEPTION` is set to ``False``, trying
  to view content that raises an exception will trigger a server error
  (http 500). Preview and edit modes will still work.


Minor features
==============

* Deleting pages or deleting translations now gives a much clearer delete
  confirmation message. It does not list all objects deleted but summarizes
  how many pages, translations (counted by ``PageUrl`` objects) and plugins
  are about to be deleted.

* ``CMS_PLACEHOLDER_CONF`` now allows to add configuration by template name for
  placeholders that not necessarily are part of a page, but could be part of
  any model (e.g., an alias). Instead for looking at pages, the placeholder tries
  to access a ``get_template()`` method on its source model instance to identify
  the template name its rendered on.

* Due to the faster way of updating content in edit mode, ``<script>`` tags do
  not need to be marked with classes like ``cms-trigger-event-document-DOMContentLoaded``,
  ``cms-trigger-event-window-DOMContentLoaded``, or ``cms-trigger-event-window-load``.
  Each script in the Sekizai ``js`` block is now executed in the order they are
  defined in the template. After all scripts have been loaded and executed, the
  document's ``DOMContentLoaded``, the window's ``load`` events are triggered. The
  ``cms-content-refresh`` jQuery event on the window is also triggered for backwards
  compatibility.

* Plugins now inherit the ``FrontendEditableMixin``. While plugins always have been
  frontend editable, this allows for defining parts of the rendered plugin to just
  edit, say, a subset of fields. Other packages, such as djangocms-text, can use this
  common endpoint to provide inline editing for selected fields of their plugins.


************************************
Backward incompatible changes in 5.0
************************************

Merging of Page.node into Page
==============================

To improve performance and simplify database accesses, the ``TreeNode`` model
has been merged into the ``Page`` model. This change is backward incompatible
and will require a database migration.

Compatibility shims have been added to the ``Page`` model to ensure that custom
code that accesses the ``Page.node`` attribute will continue to work. However,
this compatibility shim will be removed in django CMS 6.0 release. For now,
they raise a ``RemovedInDjangoCMS60Warning`` warning.

Most prominent changes to custom code are:

* Pages have a ``site`` field again: ``page.node.site`` becomes ``page.site``
* ``page.node.path`` becomes ``page.path``
* ``page.node.depth`` becomes ``page.depth``
* ``page.node.numchild`` becomes ``page.numchild``
* ``page.node.parent`` and ``page.page_parent`` become ``page.parent``

Please also check your ``.filter()``, ``.order()``, ``.select_related()``, and
``.prefetch_related()`` calls to ensure they are still correct:
``.filter(node__site=site)`` becomes ``.filter(site=site)`` etc.

If you have custom code that accesses the ``Page.node`` attribute, you should
update it to use the new attributes on the ``Page`` model.

*************
Miscellaneous
*************

* The function ``cms.cms_menus.get_visible_nodes`` has been deprecated. For
  performance reasons, the ``cms_menus`` builds the navigation node list based
  on page content objects. Use ``cms.cms_menus.get_visible_page_contents``
  instead.

* The ``cms.test_utils.testcases.CMSTestCase`` class's ``assertWarns`` has been
  removed since it was an alias of ``CMSTestCase.failUnlessWarns`` and shadows
  Python's ``assertWarns``. In your test cases, use
  Python's ``assertWarns`` instead, or use the ``failUnlessWarns`` method
  of ``CMSTestCase`` which retains the syntax of the original method.

* ``CMSPluginBase.get_require_parent()``, ``CMSPluginBase.get_child_class_overrides()``,
  ``CMSPluginBase.get_child_plugin_candidates()``, ``CMSPluginBase.get_child_classes()``,
  ``CMSPluginBase.get_parent_classes()`` by default receive ``None`` for their
  ``page`` argument.

**************************
Features deprecated in 5.0
**************************

* Use of the ``node`` property of the :class:`~cms.models.pagemodel.Page` model
  is deprecated. Use its attributes on the :class:`~cms.models.pagemodel.Page`
  model directly instead.

***********************************
Removal of deprecated functionality
***********************************

* Built-in alias plugin: The alias plugin has been removed. If you need
  this functionality, you can use the ``djangocms-alias`` package.

* ``SuperLazyIterator``: This class has been removed. If you need this
  functionality, you can use the ``django.utils.functional.lazy``.

* ``LazyChoiceField``: This class has been removed. If you need this
  functionality, you can use the default ``django.forms.fields.ChoiceField`` class.

* ``SlugWidget``: This class has been removed from ``cms.wizard.forms``. If you
  need this functionality, you can use the ``cms.admin.forms.SlugWidget`` class.

* ``CMSPlugin.get_breadcrumb`` and ``CMSPlugin.get_breadcrumb_json``: These
  methods have been removed. They are unused, undocumented, and were broken since
  django CMS 4.0.
