.. _upgrade-to-5.1.0:

###################
5.1.0 release notes
###################

*July 10, 2026*

Welcome to django CMS 5.1.0!

These release notes cover the new features, as well as some backwards
incompatible changes you need to consider when upgrading from django CMS
5.0.x or earlier. Read the upgrade instructions and removed-functionality
section before updating an existing project.

*******************************
Django and Python compatibility
*******************************

django CMS 5.1 supports **Django 5.2, 6.0, and 6.1**. Django 4.2, 5.0, and
5.1 are no longer supported because those series no longer receive upstream
maintenance. We highly recommend and only support the latest release of each
supported series.

It supports **Python 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, and 3.14**.

******************
Release highlights
******************

django CMS 5.1 focuses on easier project setup, more flexible deployments,
more precise plugin configuration, and a modernized editing interface.

* **Create projects for different use cases.** The improved ``djangocms``
  command can create traditional, headless, or hybrid projects. Optional
  components such as versioning, moderation, aliases, and stories can be
  selected interactively or through command-line options.

* **Integrate django CMS into an existing Django project.** Running
  ``djangocms .`` updates an existing project using reviewable, idempotent
  changes. ``djangocms . --dry-run`` previews the proposed changes without
  modifying files or installing packages.

* **Run multiple sites from one configuration.** Projects can omit
  ``SITE_ID`` and resolve the current site from the request host, or supply
  custom site-selection logic through middleware.

* **Control where plugins are available.** Plugins can be restricted by
  content model, placeholder slot, and parent or child plugin type. Glob
  patterns and automatic child restrictions make these rules easier to
  maintain in larger plugin libraries.

* **Use a modernized editing interface.** The new design improves contrast,
  spacing, visual consistency, and light/dark color-scheme support. The
  previous theme remains available as a migration aid.

* **Deploy on all maintained platform versions.** django CMS 5.1 supports Django
  5.2, 6.0, and 6.1 and Python 3.10 through 3.14.

* **Benefit from security and reliability improvements.** The release
  strengthens authorization around editing and clipboard operations, improves
  Content Security Policy compatibility, repairs inconsistent plugin
  positions, and addresses deadlock and query-performance issues.

***********************
How to upgrade to 5.1.0
***********************

Before upgrading, back up your database and uploaded media and review the
:ref:`backward-incompatible changes <upgrade-5.1-backward-incompatible>` below.
In particular, django CMS 5.1 requires Django 5.2 or newer and removes APIs
that were previously deprecated.

Upgrade django CMS and ensure that your environment contains a compatible
Django version::

    python -m pip install --upgrade "django-cms==5.1.0" "Django>=5.2"

Then apply migrations, collect static files, and run the django CMS checks::

    python manage.py migrate
    python manage.py collectstatic --noinput
    python manage.py cms check

Test custom plugins, apphooks, permissions, frontend editing, and all templates
in a staging environment before deploying. Projects that customize or replace
django CMS migrations should also review the new squashed initial migration.

*******************
What's new in 5.1.0
*******************

New UI design
=============

The most prominent change in django CMS 5.1.0 is the new user interface design. While functionally
similar to the previous design, it offers a more modern and streamlined experience, better color
contrast, and more consistency between the frontend editor and Django's admin interface.

Key changes include:

* A Django-like green-based color palette with automatic light and dark modes
* A modern design with rounded corners and updated icons
* Improved visual hierarchy and spacing

It is active by default, but the legacy design can be re-enabled by adding the ``data-cms-theme``
attribute with the value ``4`` to the ``<html>`` tag in your templates, for example
``<html data-cms-theme="4">``. This is intended as a migration aid while adapting
custom styling to the new design.

More flexible site configurations
=================================

The Django admin app does not have to be available on all sites. You can now
configure which sites have access to the admin interface and still edit all sites
using the admin's frontend editing and preview endpoints. This is especially useful
if you do not want to expose the admin interface on external production sites.

You can now run multiple sites with one settings file. If you omit the ``SITE_ID`` in
your settings, django CMS will determine the current site using Django's site framework
based on the request's host header. This allows you to run multiple sites with one
instance and one settings file. Note, that apphooks must not share the same URLs in
such a scenario to avoid conflicts.

If you need more complex site determination logic, you can implement a custom
middleware that sets ``request.site`` accordingly. It will be respected by django CMS.

For a step‑by‑step guide and examples, see :doc:`../how_to/03-multi-site` (including
notes on apphook isolation and URL conflicts). For management commands that run without
an HTTP request, consult :doc:`../reference/cli` for options like ``--site`` to select the
target site context.

Model-specific plugins
======================

Plugins can now be restricted to specific models using two complementary filters:

- Plugin-level: ``CMSPluginBase.allowed_models`` — list of model identifiers
  (``"app_label.modelname"``) with the two special values ``None`` (allowed everywhere) and
  ``[]`` (allowed nowhere).
- Model-level: ``Model.allowed_plugins`` — list of plugin class names, with the special
  value ``None`` (all plugins allowed, subject to their own ``allowed_models``).

Both filters must pass for the frontend editor to offer a plugin to users.
This is particularly useful for plugins that are bound to specific Django models and should
not be available to editors on other models - or to restrict certain models to a curated set
of plugins.

Example::

    class TextFieldPlugin(CMSPluginBase):
        render_template = "forms/fields/text.html"
        allowed_models = ["my_form_app.form"]

    class Form(models.Model):
        fields = PlaceholderRelationField("fields")
        allowed_plugins = ["TextFieldPlugin"]

See also the how-to guide for details and more examples:
:ref:`plugin-model-restrictions`.

Simplified project creation with the ``djangocms`` command
==========================================================

Setting up django CMS is now a one-liner. The new ``djangocms`` command (also
available as ``python -m cms``) scaffolds a complete, ready-to-run project,
installs its requirements, runs the migrations, creates a superuser and checks
the installation for you::

    djangocms myproject

Run without a project name it drops into an **interactive mode** that asks for
the name and walks you through every option. You can also drive it entirely
from the command line, for example::

    djangocms myproject --mode headless --no-versioning --stories

The most important options are:

* ``--mode {traditional,headless,hybrid}`` — choose how the CMS serves content
  (default: ``traditional``).
* ``--versioning`` / ``--no-versioning`` — add content versioning with
  `djangocms-versioning <https://github.com/django-cms/djangocms-versioning>`_
  (default: on).
* ``--moderation`` / ``--no-moderation`` — add content moderation (builds on
  versioning; default: off).
* ``--alias`` / ``--no-alias`` — add reusable
  `aliases <https://github.com/django-cms/djangocms-alias>`_ (default: on).
* ``--stories`` / ``--no-stories`` — add the stories component library
  (default: off).
* ``--interactive`` / ``--noinput`` — force or suppress all prompts.

Adding django CMS to an existing project
----------------------------------------

The same command can now **add django CMS to an existing Django project**
instead of scaffolding a new one. Run it from your project root with a project
name of ``.``::

    djangocms .

django CMS then reads your project's settings module from ``manage.py`` and
makes best-effort, automated edits to wire everything up:

* updates ``INSTALLED_APPS``, ``MIDDLEWARE`` and the template context
  processors,
* creates a project ``templates`` directory with a base template if your
  project does not have one yet,
* appends the required django CMS settings,
* adds the CMS URL patterns to your ``ROOT_URLCONF`` (respecting
  ``i18n_patterns`` when already in use), and
* installs the packages needed for the selected options, then runs the
  migrations and ``cms check``.

The same ``--mode`` and component options above apply, so you can tailor the
installation to your needs. The edits are automated and should be reviewed
afterwards, so make sure your project is under version control or backed up
before running it. The command is idempotent: running it again will not
duplicate the changes.

You can preview everything first with ``--dry-run``, which prints a unified diff
of the changes it would make — without writing any files or installing
anything::

    djangocms . --dry-run

By default, the rules that govern these edits are fetched from the
``cms-template`` repository matching your installed django CMS version, with a
bundled copy serving as an offline fallback. A custom ``--template`` can
provide its own ``djangocms_install_rules.json`` so organizations can keep
project generation and existing-project integration in the same versioned
template.

See :ref:`tutorial_install` for a step-by-step walkthrough.

Minor features
==============

* Plugins can restrict themselves to placeholder slots with
  ``CMSPluginBase.allowed_slots``. It accepts slot names or glob patterns and
  is enforced when plugins are added, copied, or moved. See
  :attr:`~cms.plugin_base.CMSPluginBase.allowed_slots`.

* Plugin parent/child restrictions are more expressive. The ``child_classes`` and
  ``parent_classes`` attributes (and their ``CMS_PLACEHOLDER_CONF`` counterparts) now accept
  glob patterns such as ``"Bootstrap*"`` or ``"*Link*"``, which are expanded against the names
  of all registered plugins. An empty list (``[]``) now consistently means "none allowed"
  (no children, or no parent — i.e. placeholder only), whereas ``None`` continues to mean
  "no restriction". As a special case, ``parent_classes = ["*"]`` requires the plugin to have
  a parent (any plugin). Expansion is cached, so restriction evaluation stays fast on the
  rendering path. In addition, ``child_classes = "auto"`` allows exactly those plugins that
  explicitly name this plugin in their ``parent_classes``, so children opt in to a parent
  rather than the parent having to list every allowed child.

* Placeholder objects now have a :meth:`~cms.models.placeholdermodel.Placeholder.delete_plugins`
  method which efficiently bulk-deletes multiple plugins from the placeholder. It takes an iterable
  of plugin objects as a parameter.

* User middleware and apphook registration are now async-compatible, allowing
  django CMS projects to be deployed under ASGI. Database access is avoided
  while registering apphook URLs. Database-backed request handling remains
  subject to Django's synchronous ORM behavior.

* Apphooks now by default allow access to the page content object's placeholders on
  the apphook's root page.

* ``CMSApp`` implementations can provide a root template for their apphooks.

* Menu caching can use a dedicated Django cache through the new
  :setting:`CMS_MENU_CACHE_BACKEND` setting.

* Allow page permission change from advanced settings with appropriate permissions

* Add icon for redirected pages in page tree

* Let the "eye" icon in the page tree directly go to edit endpoints for editable content

* Preserve GET parameters when switching to preview or edit mode

* Improved UX for external placeholders (e.g., static aliases)

* Optimized placeholder and plugin utilities for better performance

* Re-introduced help menu

* Django 5.2, 6.0, and 6.1 compatibility

* Introduce contracts for django CMS Extensions

* Clearer page permission admin: the ``can_view`` field is now labelled "can view
  restricted pages" with help text explaining that granting view access also restricts
  the page, the ``can_change_permissions`` help text spells out what it controls, and the
  "edit permissions required" validation messages now name the exact "Can edit" checkbox
  to enable.



Bug Fixes
=========

* Correct inaccurate and stale keyword arguments sent with placeholder operation signals
* Enforce authorization on structure rendering, plugin movement, and clipboard endpoints
* Prevent inline editing from bypassing permissions
* Prevent toolbar login from following an unverified redirect
* Prevent page titles from being inserted unescaped into rendering errors
* Prevent clipboard-clearing operations from being triggered by GET requests
* Harden page duplication, group permission handling, and URL validation
* Automatically repair corrupted plugin positions
* Cascade-delete plugins belonging to detached placeholders
* Prevent deadlocks when moving large page subtrees
* Avoid locking the entire page tree while editing a page
* Fix migrations when using a custom user model
* Fix copying clipboard content into a different language
* Honour plugin-declared ``Vary`` headers in page cache keys
* Fix N+1 queries in the page tree, ``cms check``, and ``delete-orphaned-plugins``
* Remove remaining inline JavaScript and CSS that could violate Content Security Policy
* Fix ``get_permissions`` for missing global permissions
* Make the create-page wizard available on an empty installation
* Make ``Placeholder.add_plugin()`` set ``plugin.instance`` to itself
* Resolve an empty ``page_title`` in frontend edit mode for apphooks
* Improve anti-aliasing of the django CMS logo PNG
* Use ``PageContent.template_choices`` for template choices instead of settings
* Allow existing child plugin restrictions to be reduced to an empty list, meaning no plugins are allowed
* Gracefully handle unresolvable extends variables in placeholder scanning
* Allow frontend-editable models to omit get_template method
* Safe fallback for includes when scanning for placeholders
* Fix ApphookReloadMiddleware not handling new language variants
* Fix copying when a target placeholder is missing
* Prevent grouper administration from retaining read-only fields as prepopulated fields

.. _upgrade-5.1-backward-incompatible:

**************************************
Backward incompatible changes in 5.1.0
**************************************

Placeholder operation signals
=============================

Placeholder operation signal keyword arguments now consistently describe the
state at the time of the signal: pre-operation signals describe the state before
the operation, post-operation signals describe the resulting state, and
``source_*`` arguments retain their original source values. Consequently,
``*_order`` and source-related arguments can differ from the previously empty,
stale, or target-side values.

The ``ADD_PLUGIN`` post-operation signal also now includes a ``tree_order``
keyword argument. Custom signal receivers must accept ``**kwargs``, as recommended
for Django signal receivers, and must not rely on the previous incorrect values.

Dependencies, settings, and migrations
======================================

* The minimum supported Django version is now 5.2. Support for Django 4.2,
  5.0, and 5.1 has been removed because those series no longer receive
  upstream maintenance.
* The obsolete ``CMS_CONFIRM_VERSION4`` setting has been removed and should be
  deleted from project settings.
* The ``admin-style`` optional dependency now installs
  ``djangocms-simple-admin-style`` instead of the deprecated
  ``djangocms-admin-style`` package. Review ``INSTALLED_APPS`` if your project
  explicitly configured the old package.
* A squashed initial migration covering migrations 0001 through 0022 has been
  added. Normal installations can run ``migrate`` as usual. Projects that
  replace, import, or otherwise customize django CMS migrations should review
  their migration dependencies before upgrading.

Features deprecated in 5.1.0
============================

Page model
----------

* The manager method
  ``Page.objects.get_title(page, language, language_fallback=False)`` will be
  removed in django CMS 6.0. Use ``page.get_content_obj()`` or
  ``page.get_admin_content()`` instead.
* ``Page`` attribute ``page.parent_page`` is deprecated. Instead use the attribute ``page.parent``.
* ``Page`` method ``page.get_parent_page()`` is deprecated and will be removed
  in django CMS 6.0. Use the ``page.parent`` attribute instead.
* ``Page`` attribute ``page.languages`` is deprecated and will be removed in
  django CMS 6.0. Use ``page.get_languages()`` instead.
* ``Page`` methods ``page.remove_language()`` and ``page.update_languages()``
  are deprecated and will be removed in django CMS 6.0. They have no effect.
* ``Page`` method ``page.get_published_languages()`` is deprecated and will be
  removed in django CMS 6.0. Use ``page.get_languages(admin_manager=False)``
  instead.
* ``Page`` method ``page.set_translations_cache()`` is deprecated and will be
  removed in django CMS 6.0. Use ``page.get_content_obj()`` instead; it leaves
  the translations cache populated. For admin views, use
  ``page.set_admin_content_cache()``.
* The ``parent_node`` keyword argument to ``Page.copy()`` and
  ``Page.copy_descendant()`` has been renamed to ``parent_page``.
  ``parent_node`` is deprecated and will be removed in django CMS 6.0.

Page permissions
----------------

* The ``PagePermission.get_page_ids()`` method is deprecated and will be
  removed in django CMS 6.0. Use ``get_page_permission_tuple()`` instead for
  faster permission checks by path rather than ID.

Plugin rendering
----------------

* ``BaseRenderer`` method ``renderer.get_placeholder_toolbar_js()`` has a keyword argument ``page`` which will be
  removed in django CMS 6.0. It can already be safely removed from all calls.
* The ``parents`` keyword argument of ``CMSPlugin.get_plugin_info()``, ``cms.toolbar.utils.get_plugin_toolbar_info()``
  and ``cms.toolbar.utils.get_plugin_toolbar_js()`` is deprecated and will be removed in django CMS 6.0. Parent plugin
  restrictions are no longer sent to the frontend -- droppability is derived from the child restrictions of each
  potential parent (and of the placeholder) -- so the argument and the ``plugin_parent_restriction`` entry it produced
  can be safely removed from all calls.

Utility functions
-----------------

* Most ``cms.utils.i18n`` utility functions accepting an optional ``site_id`` argument will require this argument
  in django CMS 6.0. These functions are ``get_languages()``, ``get_language_code()``, ``get_language_list()``,
  ``get_language_tuple()``, ``get_language_dict()``, ``get_public_languages()``, ``get_language_object()``,
  ``get_language_objects()``, ``get_default_language()``,
  ``get_fallback_languages()``, ``get_redirect_on_fallback()``, and
  ``hide_untranslated()``.
* ``cms.utils.page_permissions.user_can_add_page()`` and ``cms.utils.page_permissions.has_generic_permission``
  accepting an optional ``site`` argument will require this argument in django CMS 6.0.
* ``cms.utils.page.get_page_queryset()`` is deprecated and will be removed in
  django CMS 6.0. Use ``Page.objects.on_site(site)`` instead.
* ``cms.utils.placeholder.get_toolbar_plugin_struct()`` has a keyword argument
  ``page`` which has been renamed to ``obj``. ``page`` is deprecated and will
  be removed in django CMS 6.0.

Wizard helpers
--------------

* The ``cms.wizards.helpers`` module has been deprecated and will be removed in django CMS 6.0. Use
  ``cms.wizards.wizard_base.get_entries()`` and ``cms.wizards.wizard_pool.get_entry()`` instead.

Removal of deprecated functionality
===================================

API
---

``cms.api.create_title`` has been removed. Use :meth:`cms.api.create_page_content` instead.


``StaticPlaceholder``
---------------------

* ``StaticPlaceholder`` has been removed from ``cms.models`` and ``cms.admin``.
  Use `static aliases <https://github.com/django-cms/djangocms-alias>`_ instead.

* This implies that ``cms.plugin_rendering`` does not accept static placeholders any more.

* The ``static_placeholder`` template tag has been removed.

Placeholders
------------

* ``PlaceholderField`` has been removed from ``cms.fields``. Use
  :class:`~cms.models.fields.PlaceholderRelationField` with
  :meth:`~cms.utils.placeholder.get_placeholder_from_slot` instead (also see
  :ref:`placeholders_outside_cms`).

* ``PlaceholderAdminMixin`` has been removed from ``cms.admin``. It is no
  longer needed and can be safely removed from your code.

* A placeholder's ``actions`` property (deprecated in django CMS 5) has been
  removed. This also removes ``cms.utils.placeholder.PlaceholderNoAction`` and
  ``cms.utils.placeholder.MLNGPlaceholderActions``. If you need these classes,
  move them to your own codebase.

Permissions
-----------

``cms.utils.permissions.has_page_permission()`` has been removed. Use
:func:`cms.utils.page_permissions.has_generic_permission()` instead.

As part of performance improvements, the following methods have been removed from
``cms.utils.page_permissions``. They were deprecated in django CMS 4.1:

* ``cms.utils.page_permissions.get_add_ids()``
* ``cms.utils.page_permissions.get_change_ids()``
* ``cms.utils.page_permissions.get_change_advanced_settings_ids()``
* ``cms.utils.page_permissions.get_change_permissions_ids()``
* ``cms.utils.page_permissions.get_get_delete_ids()``
* ``cms.utils.page_permissions.get_move_page_ids()``
* ``cms.utils.page_permissions.get_publish_ids()``
* ``cms.utils.page_permissions.get_view_ids()``
* ``cms.utils.permissions.get_view_restrictions()``


Menus
-----

* ``cms.cms_menus.get_visible_nodes`` has been removed. Use ``cms.cms_menus.get_visible_page_contents`` instead.

* ``cms.cms_menus.get_menu_node_for_page`` has been removed. Use
  ``cms.cms_menus.get_menu_node_for_page_content`` instead.

Miscellaneous
-------------

* The ``title`` property has been removed from ``cms.cms_toolbars.PageToolbar``.
  Use ``cms.cms_toolbars.PageToolbar.page_content`` instead.

* ``cms.forms.get_root_nodes`` has been removed. Use ``cms.cms_menus.get_root_pages`` instead.

* ``cms.extensions.toolbar.ExtensionToolbar.get_title_extension_admin`` has been removed.
  Use ``cms.extensions.toolbar.ExtensionToolbar.get_page_content_extension_admin`` instead.

* ``cms.toolbar.utils.get_plugin_tree_as_json`` has been removed. Use
  ``cms.toolbar.utils.get_plugin_tree`` and convert the result to JSON instead.
