####################
Internationalisation
####################


*****************
Multilingual URLs
*****************

If you use more than one language, django CMS urls, *including the admin URLS*, need to be
referenced via :func:`~django.conf.urls.i18n.i18n_patterns`. For more information about this see
the official `Django documentation
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/topics/i18n/translation/#internationalization-in-url-patterns>`_
on the subject.

Here's an example of `urls.py`::

    from django.conf import settings
    from django.conf.urls import include, url
    from django.contrib import admin
    from django.conf.urls.i18n import i18n_patterns
    from django.contrib.staticfiles.urls import staticfiles_urlpatterns

    admin.autodiscover()

    urlpatterns = [
        url(r'^jsi18n/(?P<packages>\S+?)/$', 'django.views.i18n.javascript_catalog'),
    ]

    urlpatterns += staticfiles_urlpatterns()

    # note the django CMS URLs included via i18n_patterns
    urlpatterns += i18n_patterns('',
        url(r'^admin/', include(admin.site.urls)),
        url(r'^', include('cms.urls')),
    )


.. _documentation: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/topics/i18n/translation/#internationalization-in-url-patterns

***************
Language Cookie
***************

If a user comes back to a previously visited page, the language will be same since his last visit.

By default if someone visits a page at `http://www.mysite.fr/` django determines the language as follow:

- language in URL
- language in session
- language in cookie
- language in from browser
- LANGUAGE_CODE from settings

More in-depth documentation about this is available at
https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/topics/i18n/translation/#how-django-discovers-language-preference

When visiting a page that is only English and French with a German browser, the language from LANGUAGE_CODE will be used.
If this is English, but the visitor only speaks French, the visitor will have to switch the language.
Visiting the same page now again after some time, will show it in English again, because the browser session which was
used to store the language selection doesn't exist any more. To prevent this issue, a middleware exists which stores the
language selection in a cookie. Add the following middleware to `MIDDLEWARE_CLASSES`:

    `cms.middleware.language.LanguageCookieMiddleware`

****************
Language Chooser
****************

The :ttag:`language_chooser` template tag will display a language chooser for the
current page. You can modify the template in ``menu/language_chooser.html`` or
provide your own template if necessary.

Example:

.. code-block:: html+django

    {% load menu_tags %}
    {% language_chooser "myapp/language_chooser.html" %}



If you are in an apphook and have a detail view of an object you can
set an object to the toolbar in your view. The cms will call ``get_absolute_url`` in
the corresponding language for the language chooser:

Example:

.. code-block:: html+django

    class AnswerView(DetailView):
        def get(self, *args, **kwargs):
            self.object = self.get_object()
            if hasattr(self.request, 'toolbar'):
                self.request.toolbar.set_object(self.object)
            response = super(AnswerView, self).get(*args, **kwargs)
            return response


With this you can more easily control what url will be returned on the language chooser.

.. note::

    If you have a multilingual objects be sure that you return the right url if you don't have
    a translation for this language in ``get_absolute_url``

*****************
page_language_url
*****************

This template tag returns the URL of the current page in another language.

Example:

.. code-block:: html+django

    {% page_language_url "de" %}


*****************
hide_untranslated
*****************

If you add a default directive to your :setting:`CMS_LANGUAGES` with a :setting:`hide_untranslated` to ``False``
all pages will be displayed in all languages even if they are
not translated yet.

If `hide_untranslated`  is ``True`` in your :setting:`CMS_LANGUAGES`
and you are on a page that doesn't yet have an English translation and you view
the German version then the language chooser will redirect to ``/``. The same
goes for urls that are not handled by the cms and display a language chooser.

********************************************
Automated slug generation Unicode characters
********************************************

If your site has languages which use non-ASCII character sets, you might want
to enable :setting:`CMS_UNIHANDECODE_HOST` and :setting:`CMS_UNIHANDECODE_VERSION`
to get automated slugs for those languages too.
